The foundation
Mula-aadhar means it is a foundation. We must understand,
this is the foundation of our physical structure.
If this foundation is not stabilized, one will not know
health, one will not know well-being,
one will not know a certain level of
sense of being stable and complete
because these qualities are very essential
if you want a certain human being to make an effort to climb high.
One who is shaky on his legs, you can't make him climb a ladder.
Only one who is firm on his legs, you can ask him to climb.
And he is willing to climb because there is a certain...
there is a certain assurance in his legs.
Assurance is not just in your mind, assurance is in your body also.
This assurance is needed for one to walk through this planet
efficiently and in a capable manner.
If you're little unsteady on your legs, you wouldn't want to walk, you would want to sleep.
Only when you feel steady on your legs, you want to walk. So
muladhara is the basis of this. An entire school of yoga, from
ways of doing things with the body to reach your
ultimate nature, an entire school of yoga
evolved out of muladhara.
One fundamental school, or one fundamental aspect of
muladhara, which came out, which a certain dimension of yoga,
which got referred to as kayakalpa. That means
kaya means body, kalpa means either establishing it,
to bring stability to it, it also means extending it.
Kalpa essentially means a certain unit of time, which is very large.
In English, we can say it's like a eon, let's say a millennia.
So, you want to make the body last for a millennia or more, for a eon.
There have been many beings, who lasted out like this for hundreds of years
because they practiced what is called as kayakalpa, that is taking charge
of the fundamental ingredient in the system, which is earth.
It is the earth which has given us substance - taking charge of the earth.
Taking charge of the earth also gives you certain other capabilities - that is,
many things that the earth has to offer to us, many things that the soil has to offer to us,
to be able to grasp that, one dimension of bhuta shuddhi,
which is the earth, to be able to get that in to the system,
to be able to get the juice of life into the system, you...
You are seeing solidified mercury,
this is kayakalpa. This is stabilizing a liquid
into a solid state. Because
mercury is referred to as rasa or the juice of this planet.
This is the very juice. If you can solidify a liquid
which in its nature cannot be solid, then this is kayakalpa.
This means many aspects of this body, which naturally
deteriorate with time, you stabilize it in such a way
that this deterioration is completely... not at a freeze,
but has slowed down to such a point that
it looks like you're ageless and timeless, that you have a kaya
which will last out a kalpa, that is,
a body which will last out an entire eon.
There have been many beings like that but these things take enormous amount of work
of trying to make a body like a rock.
There are rocks in the mountain.
In our perception, they seem to be forever. But
geologically, we know they were formed and they will be dismantled.
Because their timespan is a kalpa in our understanding,
because their lifespan is a kalpa
in our perception and experience of life…
If... You know...
A little bit smell of rain, not even rain,
just the smell of rain, a few drops fell somewhere,
suddenly these ants start flying with wings.
They're on just for about an hour-and-a-half or two and then they're gone.
I'm sure in their experience, you are a kalpa.
Even if you live half a life, still you are a kalpa. If you live for fifty years,
those insects will think you lasting forever.
So kayakalpa means that in... you look at something, let's say a rock
and you understand the composition of how a rock is made
what gives it that integrity that it will last for a period
which is much, much longer than the period that this body will last,
and try to make it like that. Or in other words, in some way you become a rock.
There are automobile companies, which are advertising that it's like a rock.
If you don't know this, the Chevy ad says, "It's like a rock."
I don't know why you would like to drive a rock. Who would want to drive a rock
I hope the airplane companies don't take it up
If an airplane company says, "It's like a rock",
obviously it won't fly. And if it flies, it'll drop like a rock.
So kayakalpa if you do, you become like a rock.
What is the point? Well, in a society, if you're like a rock
you can earn a living, and you can act like a superman,
you can fascinate people.
But a rock sometimes may not let you pass.
So, the capability that comes, comes in many different ways.
In the sense, one aspect of kayakalpa is
there is a certain dimension,
which today… I wouldn't like to call this but you know,
we are speaking in English language, so we need to
cater to a certain logic,
which people think is the only logic, which is completely wrong.
There is something called as a pineal gland.
The entire aspect of...
various aspects of yoga or sadhana of yoga is to move it little down
south, it's called, moving it south.
This is the symbolism of Shiva turning south because
his third eye moved south. What was up here
came down between the two eyes. The moment it came here,
he saw things that nobody had ever seen.
Now, if this happens in a certain way,
the secretions of the pineal, which in yoga is referred to as amrit
or amruta or amrutam in... probably in Sanskrit,
this amrutam either can be taken
into the system to strengthen the system
and increase or extend the longevity of the system,
or this amrita can be taken
to create blissfulness in the system. Like a drug,
it can just blow you away.
Or you can use this amrita to enhance your perception,
that you can become like thin air because
everything that is here passes through you.
Right now, air passes only through your nostrils
and you know if it doesn't pass, you're gone.
If this air can pass through... right across you…
Some of you might at some moment felt,
when you're very carefree and joyful, you stood in the breeze,
it feels like breeze is passing through you.
Then you become hundred percent transparent.
That is because you've used your amrita to bring sensitivity to the system.
So these are three fundamental ways. One is
to strengthen the body to make it like a rock,
which will give a certain longevity to that person,
which is considered superhuman by most people,
or to bring such a level of drunkenness and blissfulness within you that
you don't care how long you live,
or to make yourself like thin air that your perception is super hyped
because there is absolutely no resistance the system. The same secretions
of the pineal gland can be used in three different ways.
And kayakalpa largely uses it to strengthen the body,
to extend the longevity of the system.
If you live here too long, others will want you to go.
You may not want to go but the rest will want you to go.
A rock, we bear with it because it doesn't talk and walk.
But if you hang around for too long, people will wonder when
But of course, some people will worship you because you look superhuman.
Some people will be amazed by you because you don't die.
Some people will be frustrated that you don't die
This amrita or this secretion of the pineal gland
will play the right kind of role in the system... When I say right, in my perception,
only if it enhances your perception it is right, because
if you do not enhance your perception, your life doesn't get enhanced in any way.
It only gets enhanced in somebody else's eyes.
If you become like a rock,
your experience of life may not change,
it is just other people think you are fantastic.
Well, we could have made a statue out of you and you would have been a rock anyway.
We didn't need a human being to become like a rock.
If you have a rock for a brain, this will be the problem.
You are always thinking which is a bigger rock than you,
which is a smaller rock than you. Your entire life goes into this,
as to which is superior, which is inferior, which is better, which is worse.
Endlessly, you will be comparing yourself because this is the nature of a rock.
This is the nature of physical reality.
Once you identify yourself with physical reality,
which is better, which is worse is a natural process of thought.
Only if you transcend that, can you be free from this
as to which is better and which is worse.
So, the schools which evolved out of the sadhana on muladhara…
Muladhara is very important for your existence.
But a human being, only a human being knows – no other creature is aware of
this, only human being knows – just existing is not good enough.
None of the other creatures have realized this. Rocks have not realized this.
None of them, from amoeba to an elephant have not realized this
because it is not in their nature. They think their existence is good enough.
But only a human being can know – not that everybody knows,
can know – that existence is not good enough, something else needs to happen.